unlike the other strokes when starting
the backstroke race the swimmers shall
line up in the water the position of the
hands and the toes before the start are
the responsibilities of the starter at
some competitions a judge may be
assigned to observe the position of the
feet standing in or on the gutter or
curling the toes over the lip of the
gutter is not permitted after the start
or turn some swimmers may kick out on
their side this is legal as long as the
swimmer remains past vertical toward the
back for this portion of the race they
can stay submerged for not more than 15
meters at that point the head must break
the surface of the water the backstroke
is basically as the name implies the
swimmers shall push off on their back
and continue swimming on the back
throughout the race some part of the
swimmer must break the surface of the
water throughout the race except after
the start and every turn where the
swimmer can be submerged for not more
than 15 meters this swimmers chin breaks
the surface at the 15 meter mark this is
a portion of the head so this is legal
when observing the swim mechanics of the
backstroke the judges shall observe that
the swimmer remains on the back from the
side of the pool the stroke judge shall
observe that the head breaks the surface
of the water before or at the 15 meter
mark some part of the swimmer must then
break the surface of the water
throughout the race when turning at the
end of each length
some part of the swimmer must touch the
wall during the turn the shoulders may
be turned past vertical toward the
breast after which a continuous single
or double arm pole maybe used to
initiate the turn
once the body has left the position on
the back the swimmer shall immediately
initiate the turn
the swimmer must return to the position
on the back or side past vertical toward
the back upon leaving the wall
in plainer language the swimmer can
rotate to their breast and take a single
or double arm pole and continue kicking
as long as it is part of the execution
of the turn after a swimmer rotates past
vertical toward the breast to turn they
may take one single or double arm pull
into the turn they may not take more
even if they find they are too far from
the wall this swimmer should be
disqualified
once the hand or hands complete the pull
then the swimmer must execute the turn
the head coming up can be legal as long
as it is part of the execution of the
turn this swimmer is legal the swimmer
may kick while turning as long as that
kick is part of the execution of the
turn
the swimmer may not kick into the wall
to make up distance before turning this
is an illegal turn after turning past
vertical toward the breast the swimmer
has to immediately initiate the turn
this swimmer is performing an illegal
turn
as it can be a difficult turn to judge
let's look again at some legal and
illegal backstroke turns
it is not legal for a swimmer to push
off from the wall on the breast and then
rotate to the back this turn is legal as
the swimmer immediately executed a turn
this turn is illegal because two single
arm poles are taken into the turn
this turn is illegal because the kicking
is to make up distance to the wall and
the swimmer did not immediately execute
the turn
however this swimmers turn is legal
because although there is kicking all
the way through the turn the swimmer
immediately executed the turn like the
previous swimmer this swimmer is turning
very slowly as long as the arm is moving
the turn is being executed this is a
legal turn another form of a legal turn
is when the swimmer touches the wall
while on their back then turns in any
manner as long as they are at or past
vertical toward the back when their feet
leave the wall it is legal when a
swimmer begins to rotate past vertical
toward the breast but touches the wall
with some part of their body before
executing the turn the swimmer may then
turn in any manner as long as they are
at or past vertical toward their back
when the feet leave the wall a swimmer
may not go back to the wall if they turn
too early and miss touching the wall the
backstroke turn can be a difficult turn
to judge remember if you are unsure of
the call the swimmer always gets the
benefit of the doubt when observing the
turn the judge at the end of the pool
should stand over the lane
once the swimmer passes vertical toward
the breast you should observe that all
actions of the swimmer are associated
with the execution of the turn also
observe that the swimmer is past
vertical toward the back when leaving
the wall the officials should watch the
feet leave the wall and then check to
see that the swimmer is past vertical
toward the back
the key to judging the backstroke turn
is to observe the whole body the arm
pole initiates the turn and must be
followed by the execution of the turn
when finishing the backstroke race the
swimmer must touch the wall while on the
back the race is finished when any part
of the body touches the wall at the end
of the prescribed distance when
observing the swimmer at the finish make
sure they do not completely submerge
prior to the touch as you shift your
focus to the touch do not look back the
race is over now that we've gone over
the backstroke let's take a look at the
breaststroke